LEXR GETTING STARTED — ARCH LINUX ARM ON SURFACE PRO 11

This experimental USB boots a terminal using the custom Surface kernel. Choose
X1E/OLED or X1P/LCD in GRUB to match your device. Disable Secure Boot for this
unsigned kernel and external device tree. X1E/OLED live and installed boot with
v23, installed touchscreen input and Wi-Fi after reconnecting were confirmed on
2026-09-08. Recovery, cross-ABI upgrades and X1P/LCD remain unqualified.

The local live account is arch, with passwordless sudo. The installation section
writes only after you select and confirm a supported layout in Archinstall.
Other changes to the live session disappear at reboot.
No desktop or window manager is preselected: you choose your own environment.

1. START THE TERMINAL SETUP FLOW

  lexr-arch-setup

The menu offers kernel/network/storage checks, networking, package signing key
initialisation, this guide, the included Lexr and the guided installer. Return
to the shell at any time.
For inspection without interactive prompts:

  lexr-arch-setup --status

2. CONNECT TO YOUR NETWORK

Public Surface Wi-Fi board data is prepared before boot. Use NetworkManager's
terminal interface to choose a network; enter its password in the prompt:

  sudo nmtui

Or inspect the connection with:

  nmcli device status
  nmcli device wifi list

USB phone tethering is another option. If no wireless interface appears, collect:

  uname -r
  sudo dmesg | grep -Ei 'ath12k|firmware|wcn7850'

The kernel should report the custom ABI, for example 7.2.0-jg-0sp11v23-qcom-x1e.
Report the selected GRUB entry and output at https://github.com/ooaklee/lexr.sh/issues/52

3. USE THE LEXR INCLUDED ON THIS USB

  COMPANION_ROOT=/run/archiso/bootmnt/sp11/companion
  mkdir -p "$HOME/.local/bin"
  install -m 0755 "$COMPANION_ROOT/bin/linux-arm64/lexr" "$HOME/.local/bin/lexr"
  "$HOME/.local/bin/lexr" --help

The same bundle is retained at /usr/share/lexr/arch-media/sp11/companion.
Copy to your home directory before running it; temporary mounts can be noexec.
The bundle includes matching source, catalogues, notices and any selected
redistribution-eligible userspaces. Arch-specific userspace installation remains
under qualification; do not run Debian package installation commands on Arch.

To install the latest released Lexr when connected to the internet:

  curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ooaklee/lexr.sh/refs/heads/main/install.sh | sh

The release installer verifies its checksum and puts Lexr on your PATH. A released
version can be older than the development companion included on this test image.

4. INSTALL ARCH WITH THE GUIDED INSTALLER

Connect to the internet first, then run:

  sudo archinstall

Or choose option 6 in lexr-arch-setup. This launches the bundled Archinstall 4.4
menus with Lexr's Surface integration. Run it before upgrading the live system:
a different Archinstall version must be reviewed before using this adapter.

For installation alongside other operating systems, prepare unallocated space
first. Allow at least 16 GiB for an ext4 root and more for additional software.
Archinstall owns disk selection, formatting and confirmation. Lexr does not add
a separate partition-preservation policy; review those choices before Install.

In the menus:

  - Set your language, keyboard layout, locale, hostname and timezone.
  - Open Disk configuration and select Manual Partitioning.
  - Select the disk containing your existing ESP and the unallocated space.
  - In the free space, create one ext4 partition mounted at /.
  - Assign /boot/efi to the existing FAT EFI System Partition on a GPT disk. Keep its
    existing status and EFI flag. Do NOT mark it for formatting.
  - Leave every other existing partition unchanged and without a mountpoint.
  - Keep /boot on the ext4 root, and leave LVM and encryption disabled.
    These are requirements of the current Surface boot payload.
  - Keep the preselected GRUB bootloader without UKI, removable fallback or
    Plymouth. Lexr fixes the kernel to lexr-kernel-sp11 and repositories to
    Arch Linux ARM.
  - Under Authentication, create your own user and password with sudo access.
  - Leave Profile unset or select Minimal for a terminal installation. You may
    choose an optional environment instead; no desktop is preselected. Profile
    graphics use Qualcomm Adreno (Mesa), including vulkan-freedreno. Old saved
    PC graphics choices are rejected; start a new configuration in that case.
    You can also customise after installation.
  - Keep NetworkManager under Network configuration. Reconnect with nmtui after
    first boot. Upstream's Copy ISO configuration handles iwd/networkd; it does
    not copy this image's NetworkManager Wi-Fi profiles.
  - Review the complete configuration, select Install and confirm it.

If Install reports an incompatible Surface boot layout, correct the highlighted
selection. For an alongside installation, do not select whole-disk erase or
format the existing ESP or other OS partitions. Archinstall executes your
confirmed disk choices. The boot hook needs 32 MiB free on the ESP and refuses
to overwrite an existing EFI/LexrArch directory.

Before formatting, Lexr checks the ARM repositories and resolves your profile
and additional packages, including dependencies. If those checks fail, correct
the selection first. Later package transactions are also checked for architecture
and Surface compatibility. This does not check every later transaction in advance
or guarantee network downloads or optional desktop support.

To inspect a configuration without partitioning or installing:

  sudo archinstall --dry-run

You can also pass --config and --creds with files saved by this installer.
--silent is accepted only with --dry-run; installation retains the confirmation.
Use bundled profiles without custom commands or external profile files/URLs.
The dry-run uses available package databases; normal installation refreshes them.

Lexr installs a fresh Arch root, the custom kernel/modules, matching DTBs, public
Wi-Fi/GPU firmware, an installed-system initramfs and ARM64 GRUB. It retains the
Lexr companion and source at /usr/share/lexr/arch-media/sp11/companion. Your new
system uses your chosen account; it does not inherit the live autologin or sudo
policy. Audio and other optional userspaces need separate Arch qualification.

After successful installation, choose Exit so you can read the boot information.
GRUB is installed in EFI/LexrArch. Its hook preserves the EFI files present when
it starts and the existing firmware BootOrder. This does not undo formatting
selected earlier in Archinstall. Select "Lexr Arch Linux ARM" in firmware, or use the exact
one-time efibootmgr --bootnext command printed by the installer before rebooting.
Keep the USB available until the installed system has booted successfully.

After booting the installed system:

  uname -r
  findmnt -no SOURCE,FSTYPE /
  pacman -Q lexr-kernel-sp11
  sudo nmtui

In nmtui, choose Activate a connection and enter your Wi-Fi password again;
live connection credentials are not copied. If your desktop has no accessible
terminal, press Ctrl+Alt+F3 (with Fn if needed) and log in to the text console.

For KDE Plasma, you can add the terminal, file manager and network widget from
that console. A minimal plasma-desktop selection does not include every app:

  sudo pacman -Syu --needed konsole dolphin plasma-nm

Konsole resolves "Terminal konsole not found" when launching Vim; Dolphin opens
folders; plasma-nm adds the network controls even when Wi-Fi already works.
Return to the graphical session with Ctrl+Alt+F1 or Ctrl+Alt+F2 and retry. If the
new widget does not appear, save work and log out and back in. For a new KDE
installation, select these under Additional packages instead. plasma-pa is an
optional volume widget, but it does not configure Surface audio support.

A desktop can use software rendering. The public image does not contain the
private Surface GPU firmware qcdxkmsuc8380.mbn. The installed KDE test reported
llvmpipe with that file missing; hardware acceleration and the private firmware
handoff still need Arch qualification. See the operator guide for this boundary.

The kernel should report the same custom ABI as the live image, and / should
be your installed ext4 partition rather than the live overlay. To rebuild its
installed initramfs after a deliberate configuration change:

  sudo mkinitcpio -p lexr-sp11

The GRUB menu and DTBs are bound to that ABI. Cross-ABI kernel upgrades and
rollback are not yet qualified; retain the existing Surface package. Do not
replace it with linux-aarch64 or regenerate this GRUB menu with generic entries.

Following the video "How to Install Arch Linux Step-by-Step Guide (archinstall)":
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LiG2wMkcrFE

The account, locale, profile, timezone and confirmation steps are familiar.
Use this ARM64 USB instead of its x86_64 download; use nmtui instead of iwctl;
use Manual Partitioning instead of its whole-disk default; keep Lexr's Surface
kernel and GRUB instead of the video's stock kernel/systemd-boot choices.

5. CUSTOMISE ARCH

The installed system uses the normal Arch Linux ARM package manager. Review a
full repository update when adding software:

  sudo pacman -Syu

Choose your editor, terminal tools, window manager or desktop. In a fresh live
session, initialise keys before using pacman (the guided installer does this):

  sudo pacman-key --init
  sudo pacman-key --populate archlinuxarm

Live-session package changes live in RAM and disappear after reboot. Avoid
upgrading Archinstall before using the bundled installation flow.

References:
  https://archlinuxarm.org/about/downloads
  https://github.com/ooaklee/lexr.sh/issues/52

6. BOOT DIAGNOSTICS

The normal entry boots the terminal. The text diagnostics entry adds early
console messages. The firmware display diagnostics entry disables the msm
module for that boot to help investigate a display handover failure.

  journalctl -b -p warning
  sudo dmesg

The live image has no SSH server enabled or personal authorisation keys.
